<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<link type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" />
<title>Chapter 1</title>
</head>
<body>

<h3>"W" Questions</h3>
<p><span>なに(何)か</span>Something<span>だれか</span>Who<span>どこか</span>somewhere<span>なんじ</span>what time<span>いつ</span>when</p>
<p><span>何 -> 何か</span>what -> something</p>
<p>EX: 何を　買いますか　-> ないか　買いますか<span> What do/will you buy? -> Do/Will you buy something?</span></p>
<p>EX: 何か　た(食)べたいです<span> I want to eat something</span></p>
<p><span>[NOUN] が　いいです</span> I would like some [NOUN]</p>
<p>EX: わたし(私) は デサート　は　ケーキ　が　いいです<span> For dessert I would like cake</span></p>
<p>Question <span>[NOUN] は　[when/who/what]　が　いいですか</span></p>
<p>Answer <span>[NOUN] いいです</span></p>
<p>EX1: <span>た(食)べもの　は　なに(何)か　いいですか。ピーザ　が　いいです</span> What would you like to eat? I would like pizza.</p>
<p>EX2: <span>パーテｲ　は　なんじ　が　いいですか</span> What time would you like to start the party?</p>
<p>EX3 Q: <span>なに(何)か　おみやげを　か(買)いたいです。何が　いいですか。</span>I would like to buy somthing for a souvenir. What to you recommend?</p>
<p>EX3 A: <span>マウスパッドは　どうですか。とても　べんりですよ</span> How about a mouse pad? Very convenient.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<h3>To try something</h3>
<p><span>[NOUN] を　[VERB てform] みます</span> I'm going to try [VERB] the [NOUN]</p>
<p>EX: <span>この　ケーキ　を　た(食)べてみます</span> I'm going to try(eating) the cake</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<h3>Comparisons</h3>
<p><span>[A]は[B]より[...]です/[...]ます</span>[A] is more [...] than [B]</p>
<p>EX1: <span>オーストラリア　は　にほん(日本) より　おお(大)きいです</span> Australia is bigger than Japan</p>
<p>EX2: <span>おおさか　は　おきなわ　より　にんき(人気)　が　ありまし</span> Osaka is more popular than okinawa</p>
<h4>Preference between 2 things</h4>
<p><span>[A]　と　[B]　と　どちら　(が[ADJ]/を[VERB]) [XXX] です[ADJ]/ます[VERB] か.</span> Which do you [XXX] better. [A] or [B]?</p>
<p>EX1 Q: <span>ビールとワインと　どちらが　すきですか</span> Which do you like better, beer or wine?</p>
<p>EX1 A: <span>ビール　のほうが　(ワインより)　好きです。</span> I like beer better (than wine) - The text between paranthesis is optional</p>
<p>EX2 Q: <span>Youtubeとテレビと　どちらを　よく　み(見)ますか。</span> Which do you watch more often, Youtube or TV?</p>
<p>EX2 A: <span>youtube のほうが (テレビより)　よく　見ます。</span> I watch Youtube more often (than TV) - The text between paranthesis is optional</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<h3>Expressing a sequence of events</h3>
<h4>Before...</h4>
<p><span>まえ(前)に</span>means "before". The verb coming before <span>まえ(前)に</span> is always in the dictionary form regardless of the tense of the verb at the end of the sentence.</p>
<p>EX1: <span>日本に　くる　前に、日本ご(語)の　べんきょうを　はじめました。</span>I began my studies of Japanese before I came to Japan.</p>
<p>However if the emphasis in on the duration of the previous action, you often omit <span>に</span>.</p>
<p>EX2: <span>日本に　くる　前、２年[ねん]間[かん]　日本語[ご]の　べんきょうを　していました。</span> I had studied Japanese for 2 years before I came to Japan.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<h3>Preference between 2 things</h3>
TODO [After...]
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<h3>Expressing/Asking opinion</h3>
<p><span>と　おもいます</span>　This is the phrase to express our opinion or to ask someone theirs.</p>
<h4>Expressing our opinion</h4>
<p><span>あたらしい　プロジェクトには　お金[かね]が　たくさん　かかりますか</span> Does a new project cost a lot of money?</p>
<p>The answer is in plain form.</p>
<p>YES: <span>かかると　おもいます</span> I think it will take.</p>
<p>NO: <span>かからないと　おもいます</span> I don't think it will take.</p>
<p><span>A社の　コンピュータより　安[やす]くて　いい　コンピュータが　ありますか</span> Is there a better computer that is cheaper than A(company) computer?</p>
<p>YES: <span>あると　おもいます</span></p>
<p>NO: <span>あらないと　おもいます</span></p>
<h4>Asking someone's opinion.</h4>
TODO [Asking]
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<h3>Current state/State after action</h3>
<p><span>Verb-て います</span> State in effect/ Action is completed and state is teh result</p>
<p><span>ネクタイを　しています</span> Wearing a tie.</p>
<p><span>ぼうしを　かぶっています</span> Wearing a hat.</p>
<p><span>くろい　くつを　はいています</span> Put on black shoes (and still wearing them)</p>
<h4>Connecting related sentences</h4>
<p>Noun で、Sentence です/ます</p>
<p><span>ミルズさんは　カナダ人で、かとうさんは　日本人です</span> Mr. Mills is Canadian and Mr Katou is Japanese.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<h3>Nominalising sentences</h3>
<p>plain form + の　transforms a sentence into a noun that becomes the topic for the rest of the sentence.</p>
<ul>
	<li>...のは...です</li>
	<li>...のが...です</li>
	<li>...のを...ます - Usually only used with 3 verbs (わすれます、しっていますか、まっています)</li>
</ul>
<p><span>仕事[しごと]が　おわるのは　７じごろです</span> As for when the work ends, it is around 7</p>
<p><span>漢字[かんじ]をかくのはむずかしいです</span> As for writing Kanji, it is difficult.</p>
</body>
</html>